Chapter Six. Complexes.
<break time="1.5s" />

Having studied the levels into which the mind is divided, we must next consider the nature of the material that is stored in them, and to do this we must study the workings of memory. When an idea enters the mind it does not remain an independent unit for very long. It seems to be a fundamental characteristic of ideas that they form alliances among themselves, and these groups of ideas are technically known as complexes. A complex may be compared to the branching growth of a pond-weed; it has a central starting-point from which ramify threads that divide and subdivide, and branch in every direction, and connect it with other systems of ideas that have similar branching threads. Thus it is that if an idea on any subject enters our consciousness, we find that it is not an isolated unit, but one end of a chain which branches into all sorts of side issues; we have not touched a single line of thought, but a whole railway system. These systems of ideas spread and ramify through all the levels of the mind, but if we trace them far enough, we shall invariably find that they have their roots in one of the great primal instincts, deep down in the subconscious. It is from these that they derive the vitality that binds them together for all complexes have a core of emotion and it is from the instincts that the emotions spring. Let us take an example from actual life and see how these principles work. A man may, for example, be a grocer. He will therefore have a Grocer's Complex, that is to say, all his ideas connected with the buying and selling of household commodities will be linked together so that if a train of thought be started in connection with any one aspect of his business, by an easy transition, many other aspects may drift into his mind. Now grocery is not in itself an absorbing subject like literature or science yet the man is interested in it and why? Because his grocery complex has it's root in his self preservation instinct for it is the means by which he keeps himself alive. If his grocery business prospers, he feels pleasure because it means a fuller and pleasanter life for him. If it diminishes he feels panic and fear because his means of keeping himself alive are threatened. In addition to being a grocer however, he may be an elder of the local chapel and have a far reaching complex of religious interests ramifying, interlacing, and having their instinctive roots in his subconscious, just as his grocery complex has. Then, one day, he may be looking up the current price of pepper in his trade list, and from pepper his thoughts pass to spices in general. Their pungent odour suggests incense, and he asks himself whether ritualism is ever allowable. It will here be seen that a trailing branch of his grocery complex has made contact with his religious complex and brought it into consciousness. Again, our grocer may be thinking of getting married, and immediately his grocery complex throws out a side shoot which strikes root in his reproductive instinct, and his interest in grocery is reinforced by much of the interest which gathers round sex in his life, for it is upon the prosperity of his business that his prospect of marriage depends. Thus it will be seen that the mind is filled with a ramifying mass of complexes which throw out branches in every direction, and that if the end of any thread be caught hold of, by gently pulling upon it we can draw all the complexes with which it is connected into consciousness. This is how memory works, and even if an idea has been " forgotten," that is, passed from the conscious into the subconscious, it is still possible to recover it by taking advantage of this tendency of ideas to stick together. For by gently pulling upon the parts of the complex to which it is affiliated which are in Consciousness, the branchings which are in the subconscious can be coaxed into light. It is upon this factor that psychoanalysis bases much of its work. Ideas tend to group themselves in complexes according to certain well-defined principles. First, all ideas connected with the same subject tend to become associated together. Second, ideas which enter the mind at the same time tend to become associated together. For instance, if I have a nasty fall on a piece of banana skin while going to the pillar-box, when I see bananas I shall think of falls and pillar-boxes, and when I see pillar-boxes, I may think of bananas and falls.
