WE may picture the dissociated complex with the pressure of an instinct behind it, constantly seeking to evade the censor and return to consciousness where its wishes can be translated into action, and see how the censor, reinforced by the whole weight of the character, resolutely refuses to permit its escape.
 We have seen that the dissociated complex, following the ordinary laws of association, forms alliances with ideas that have a symbolical or fanciful connection with itself. These ideas, not being in themselves objectionable to the character, are permitted by the censor to enter consciousness. Then the dissociated complex, taking advantage of its alliance with them, pours its bottled-up emotion along the association-channels thus formed, and so obtains an outlet into consciousness. This gives rise, however, to very different results from those which were its original intention, and produces those irrational likes, dislikes, and eccentricities which are characteristic of the person whose mind is not working smoothly.
 An example of this is shown in the case of a woman who noticed that the brass plates on doctors' doors had a peculiar fascination for her. When enquiry was made into the history, it was found that in her youth, she had fallen in love with the family physician who was a married man. Feeling this affection to be wrong, she had firmly put it out of her life (that is, put it into her subconscious). The association between the doctor and the brass plate was obvious enough, but as brass plates were unobjectionable, the censor offered no resistance to them, and the emotion which centred round the doctor, whose image was buried in her subconscious, was permitted to reach consciousness transferred to the innocent brass plate.
 The subconscious makes use of symbolism in precisely the same way that the poet does, but it employs a device which the poet does not. It remembers that a pair of opposites have a connecting link in their very polarity, and uses a negative to express a positive, if the positive is repugnant to the character. Thus an unmarried woman, whose healthy sex instinct has been denied fulfilment through husband and children, may become morbid. She may read literature concerning the repression of the white slave traffic, ad nauseam, and becoming worse, may develop what is called old maids' insanity, and imagine that perfectly innocent men are pestering her with immoral attentions (which in her heart she secretly desires) and go to the police for protection.

XIX. Phantasies, Dreams, And Delusions

WE have already seen that emotion is intimately allied with instinct, and that it is the thrust of the urging instincts that drives us to action, making us seek to appease the needs of our nature and incidentally fulfil certain racial and evolutionary ends. Our first attempt, urged on by these promptings, is to bring about the realisation of our desires in the external world by means of bodily effort. Should this effort fail to achieve its purpose, or should circumstances deny us the opportunity to make this effort with any hope of success, then the mind often falls back upon a secondary achievement, and images its success in the realms of phantasy and make-believe, where there are no laws of cause and effect to check its operations. Cinderella in her kitchen constructs a phantasy of the Prince's ball. She sees her wish acted out to its fulfilment in the theatre of the mind. This factor in our nature influences a large proportion of our mental processes and is considered to be the chief factor in determining the nature, not only of our dreams, but also of the symptoms of nervous and mental diseases, as will be seen later. During sleep, the avenues of the physical senses whereby impressions reach the mind, are more or less closed, and the ego, which never ceases its activities, is thrown back upon the resources of its memories. Unguided by the reason and judgment, it reviews these, following along the chains of associated ideas according to the laws of memory, which we considered in an earlier chapter. These wanderings however, though carried out with the illogicality which distinguishes the lower levels of our mind, are not entirely purposeless, being determined by various factors.