The easiest way to grasp the organisation of our complex nervous structure is to study its evolution from its humble beginnings in the simplest forms of life.
 In single-celled animalcule, the most primitive type of living creature, a single cell performs all the functions of life; it moves, breathes, assimilates, excretes and feels. With the development of multi-cellular organisms, however, different cells are given different work to do, and made to do that and nothing else.
 It then becomes necessary that co-ordination should be maintained between the sense organs that perceive the prey and the muscles that move to its capture, and for this purpose other cells are used to specialise in communication.
 Thus it will be seen that the functional unit of the nervous system is not the nerve cell, but what is called the SENSORY-MOTOR ARC, consisting of a nerve carrying the incoming sensation from a sense organ and making contact with another nerve which carries the outgoing impulse to a muscle or organ.
 When a multiplicity of muscles becomes available for movement, it is necessary to further link up the sensory-motor arc. So that other parts of the structure may be brought into play and the response not be confined to one muscle alone, nerve cells form loops upon the arcs, and loops upon the loops, with further intercommunications among themselves. The organisation becomes more and more elaborate, admits more and more complex reactions to stimuli, till finally the wonderful complications of the human brain are achieved.

III. How An Idea Enters The Mind

WHEN an impression is made on a sense organ, the sensation derived from it is telegraphed via the connecting nerve fibre to the brain, and there translated, by a process of which we know nothing, from a sensation to a thought.
 We believe that the mind learns by experience to associate certain kinds of sensation with certain objects or conditions in the environment, and when it feels these particular sensations, the mind deduces that certain objects are present and forms mental images, or thought models, intended to represent these objects.
 The truth of our percept is determined by the closeness with which our thought model corresponds to its original. An exact copy is a true concept, an imperfect copy an inaccurate concept.
 We "recognise" an object by a process of classification, noting its likeness or unlikeness to other objects already known. When an unfamiliar object attracts our attention, we put it through a process of comparison until we find to which compartment in our concept-pictures it should be assigned. If we cannot find a perfect match, we put it in the most suitable compartment we can discover, and then partition off a little subclass for it, thus admitting its identity in essentials, and its difference in details from the other occupants of that compartment.
 For example, supposing we were to land on an island and an object on the shore attracted our attention, we should try to see what class of things of which we already had experience it most closely resembled. We should observe its movements, and assign it to the class of living creatures if we see its four limbs and hair, and conclude it was an animal. If we note its upright attitude, clothes and weapons and recognise these as characteristic of humanity, but perceive that its skin differed in colour from that of any human being we had ever seen before, we should partition off a fresh subdivision in the department of our mind in which our ideas connected with humanity were stored, place it there, and probably give it a distinguishing name by means of which we could indicate it to other human beings.
 Supposing, however, we presently come across another object of the same nature, we should not have to make a fresh subdivision for it, but would classify it with the previously examined specimen, and thus we should feel this time that we " knew what it was." In fact, the process of knowing is a process of classification, and we feel that we know a thing when we have assigned it to a satisfactory pigeon-hole among our concepts.

IV. The Organisation Of The Upper Levels Of The Mind

THOSE untrained in psychology generally conceive of the mind as a homogenous whole. Our first systematic examination reveals to us, however, that the mind is just as organic as the body.