It is not that environment which, generation by generation, is receding further into the past; but that future which hour by hour is becoming the present, and from which there is no escape. It should be the aim of psychotherapy to work out the arc which evolution is describing, and to set the feet of racial wanderers upon its path. It is a futile and dangerous philosophy which proposes a return to the past as an escape from the present. Geology, zoology, sociology, and comparative psychology, all show us the evolution of that which is simple into that which is complex; from the cave man with his few needs and problems, to the complications of a modern industrial society. And we see in the little segment of the evolutionary arc with which we are most closely concerned, that the chief factor is the herd instinct which is pressing us all the time towards a more complete socialisation of humanity and that any adaptation which an individual makes must be in relation to his integration as a social unit and not to his needs as a solitary individual. Diagnostic and descriptive psychology must be distinguished from remedial psychology of which we have had all too little. Research of the abnormal mind alone will not give us the key to a healthy life, we must study social psychology as well as individual psychology, because man is a social animal, and his mental processes are determined by this fact. Any adaptation he makes, and adaptation is the basis of psychotherapy, must be in relation to his social group as well as to his own subconscious wishes. It is not enough to bring these wishes into the light of consciousness, they must be synthesised with the rest of the personality, to the social organisation of which that personality is a unit, and to the great evolutionary drift of which even the race itself is but a partial expression. Psychotherapy may begin with the primitive, but it must end with the divine, for both are integral factors in the human mind. THE END
 ***************
 I'm Julie, the woman who runs Global Grey - the website where this ebook was published. These are my own formatted editions, and I hope you enjoyed reading this particular one. If you have this book because you bought it as part of a collection - thank you so much for your support. If you downloaded it for free - please consider (if you haven't already) making a small donation to help keep the site running. If you bought this from Amazon or anywhere else, you have been ripped off by someone taking free ebooks from my site and selling them as their own. You should definitely get a refund :/
 Thanks for reading this and I hope you visit the site again - new books are added regularly so you'll always find something of interest :)